Mavis Batey, nee Lever (5 May 1921 to 12 November 2013) was a British
codebreaker during World War II. Working for Intelligence Services
Knox at Bletchley Park, her work was important for breaking the German
Enigma G cipher machine as well as the success of D-Day.

Mavis Lever was born on 5 May 1921 in Dulwich (UK) and was brought up
in Norbury and Croydon, where she went to the Coloma Convent Girls'
School. At the outbreak of WWII, she was studying German at University
College (London).

In 1940 she was recruited as a codebreaker by the Government Code &
Cypher School. Initially she worked in London, where she worked on
commercial codes. She also had to check the personal columns of The
Times for codes spy messages. After showing promise, she was selected
to work for a research unit run by Dillwyn (Dilly) Knox at Bletchley
Park.

Just 19 years old, she arrived at Bletchley Park, where she was
introduced to Knox. Shortly afterwards, in March 1941, she had her
first success when she broke the Italian Naval Enigma again, something
that would prove to be vital to the victory in the Battle of Cape
Matapan. Her most important work however, was the involvement in
breaking the Enigma G, a special version of the Enigma that was used
by the German Abwehr and that was thought to be unbreakable.

Mavis met her future husband Keith Batey whilst working at Bletchley
Park. The two got married during the war. On 12 November 2013, Mavis
died at the age of 92 after a long and interesting life. Her Husband
Keith, with whom she had three children, died in 2010 at the age of
91.


Bletchley Park


Dilly Knox had been breaking the commercial Enigma as early as 1937,
and in 1939 he was one of the driving forces behind the establishment
of Bletchley Park. By the time Mavis arrived at the park, the
codebreakers in Hut 6 were already reading the German Army and Air
Force ciphers.

Once Hut 6 was up and running, Knox had set up a research unit in The
Cottage, a small building at the stableyard next to The Mansion, where
he worked on codes and ciphers that had not yet been broken by the
people in Hut 6.

Arriving at the cottage at the age of 19, Mavis was first introduced
to Knox who, eccentric and absent-minded as he was, said: Oh, hello,
we're breaking machines, have you got a pencil? And that was it. She
was never really told what to do and had to work out the rest for
herself from scratch. That was the way the cottage worked.

Her first job was to work on the updated Italian Naval Enigma, a
system that had previously been broken by Dilly Knox, but that had
since become unreadable. In March 1941 she broke into the system,
after a German operator had made a crucial mistake when sending a test
message.


The Letter 'L'

When Mavis picked up the test message, she noticed that there wasn't a
single 'L' in it. Knowing that one of the weaknesses of the Enigma was
that a letter could never be encoded into itself, she concluded that
the operator had repeatedly been pressing the rightmost key on the
bottom row.

After reconstructing the wiring of the machine a short message was
received and deciphered. It read: Today's the day minus three. Not
knowing what it meant, the team worked and waited for three full days
and nights until an extremely long and detailed Italian Naval message
came in.


The Battle of Cape Matapan

Apparently, the Italians were sending detailed messages about a
planned attack on a Royal Navy convoy carrying supplies from Cairo to
Greece. There were full details about the number of ships and
submarines that were involved, plus a full timing schedule. The plans
were sent on to the Admiralty in London, who passed it on to Admiral
Cunningham, the commander of the Royal Navy who was responsible for
the Mediterranean Fleet. And Cunningham was able to play a nice trick.

During WWII, Japan was one of Germany's closest allies. The movements
of the Royal Navy in the Mediterranean waters were closely watched by
the Japanese consul in Alexandra (Greece) who was sending detailed
reports to the Germans.

Admiral Cunningham, who was also stationed in Alexandra, knew that the
consul was a keen golf player, so he took his clubs and an overnight
bag and visited the clubhouse, pretending that he knew nothing and was
going to stay for the weekend. Under the cover of night however, he
left the clubhouse and guided the nightly attack.

The rest is history. The Italians had no radar and were caught
completely by surprise. In a series of battles on 27/28 March 1941,
that became known as the Battle of Cape Matapan, Cunningham attacked
the Italian vessels, sinking three heavy cruisers, two destroyers, and
killing 3000 men.

Cunningham later visited Bletchley Park personally to express his
gratitude. On this occasion, the girls had to rush out into a local
pub to get some wine to celebrate the visit of the Admiral and the
victory at Matapan. The Italians never confronted the Mediterranean
Fleet again and the Battle of Cape Matapan remained the last fleet
action to have been fought by the Royal Navy during the course of the
war. In 1943, Cunningham took the surrender of the Italian Navy.


The Abwehr Enigma

Although her contribution to the victory in the Battle of Matapan was
truely significant, Mavis' most important work had yet to come. It was
her collaboration with Dilly Knox and Margret Rock, another leading
female codebreaker, on breaking the Enigma G, a special version of the
Enigma machine that was used by the German secret service, the
Abwehr. It had not been broken by Hut 6 and for a while was thought to
be unbreakable. By now, the name of Dilly Knox' the research unit was
changed to ISK, which was short for Intelligence Services Knox, or
Illicit Services Knox.

During WWII, the Germans had spies in a number of capitals, including
London. After MI5 and MI6 had captured most of the spies in Britain
and in the neutral capitals of Madrid and Lisbon, they sucessfully
turned them and used them to feed false information to the
Germans. This operation became known as the Double-Cross system (XX).

They had no idea whether the Germans believed the false intelligence
that was fed to them, and there was no way of checking this, as the
the device was so complex that the mathematicians in Hut 6 had so far
been unable to break it.

The Enigma G had no Steckerbrett but featured 11, 15 and 17 turnover
notches on the wheels, and had a moving reflector. It was also known
as the 11-15-17 machine. Knox took over the job of breaking the Enigma
G from Hut 6 and used Mavis Batey and Margret Rock as his
assistents. It was their job to test every possibility. On 8 December
1941, Mavis broke a message from the Abwehr link between Belgrade and
Madrid, which allowed them to reconstruct one of the wheels.

Within a few days, Knox had broken into the Abwehr Enigma. Shortly
afterwards, Mavis broke another Abwehr machine, the so-called
GGG. This allowed them to read the high-level Abwehr messages that
confirmed that the Germans had bought the false Double-Cross
intelligence. The Double-Cross Committee (XX Committee) [5] was now
able to feed the Germans small pieces of information that led them to
believe that the main Allied invasion would take place on the Pas de
Calais rather than on Normandy. As a result, they kept two armoured
divisions in the Calais area.


Keith Batey


Mavis met her future husband at Bletchley Park and married him during
the war. One night, she was working alone on an evening shift in the
Cottage, when she was confronted with a difficult codebreaking problem
that she could not solve. In order to solve the problem, Mavis turned
to the mathematicians of Hut 6, where break-in expert Keith Batey was
on duty that night.

Life at Bletchley Park was compartmented, and people had instructions
not to contact members from other huts and not to discuss work outside
the office. Nevertheless Dilly had no problem in seeking contact with
other departments in order to solve problems. In fact, he stronly
denounced the military imposed need-to-know policy.

In the event, Mavis and Keith investigated the problem and after
several cups of ersatz coffee, he helped here solve the problem. It
was the start of a romance that would last for 70 years.

When she told him, Dilly had absolutely no objections with her seeking
help from Hut 6 and when she later told him that she was going to
marry, what he called 'one of the clever Cambridge mathematicians from
Hut 6', he even bought the young couple a lovely wedding present.


After the War


After the war, Mavis developed in interest in the protection of
historical gardens and successfully campaigned for the Protection of
Rural England, English Heritage and the Garden History Society. In
addition, she wrote many books abouts landscapes and gardens, such as
Jane Austen and the English Landscape (1996) and Alexander Pope:
Poetry and Landscape (1999).

The work at Bletchley Park was classified. For more than 30 years she
and her husband Keith never spoke about their wartime work, but after
the revelations in Frederick Winterbotham's book The Ultra Secret she
became a frequent guest in television documentaries and newspaper
articles.

In 2009, she finally wrote a book about her warÂ­time boss Dilly Knox
and the work they carried out in the Cottage. The book was presented
at a special Enigma Reunion that was held on 5 and 6 September 2009 at
BP to commemorate the 70th anniversary of the WWII codebreaking
centre.

The book is titled: Dilly, The Man Who Broke Enigmas [2] and is a warm
affectionate biography of one of the most intriguing heros of World
War II. During the book presentation at the Enigma Reunion, staged in
the library of the Mansion, some books were even signed personally by
Mavis.

The image above was taken on 5 September 2009 during the Enigma
Reunion at Bletchley Park. It shows Mavis and her husband Keith right
at the centre of attention in a private moment with David Hamer (left)
and Sir Francis Richards (second from the left). Despite their high
age, both Mavis and Keith were still in good health during this
event. Keith would die a year later at the high age of 91. After an
interesting life, Mavis died on 12 November 2013 at the age of 92.

This biography is from www dot cryptomuseum dot com slash people slash
mavis_batey dot htm.
