Mary Kenneth Keller
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Career

Keller was born in Cleveland, Ohio on December 17, 1913 to John Adam
Keller and Catherine Josephine (nee Sullivan) Keller. She entered the
Sisters of Charity of the Blessed Virgin Mary in 1932 and took her
vows with that religious congregation in 1940. She completed both her
B.S. (Bachelor of Science) in Mathematics in 1943 and her M.S. (Master
of Science) in Mathematics and Physics in 1953 from DePaul University
in Chicago. Keller earned her Ph.D. from the University of
Wisconsinâ€“Madison in 1965. Her dissertation, Inductive Inference on
Computer Generated Patterns, focused on "constructing algorithms that
performed analytic differentiation on algebraic expression, written in
CDC FORTRAN 63."

Throughout Keller's graduate studies, she was affiliated with various
institutions including the University of Michigan, Purdue, and
Dartmouth. In 1958, Keller began working at the National Science
Foundation workshop in the computer science center at Dartmouth
College, a male-only institution at the time, where she participated
in the implementation of the BASIC programming language under John
G. Kemeny and Thomas E. Kurtz.

Keller believed in the potential for computers to increase access to
information and promote education. After finishing her doctorate in
1965, Keller founded the computer science department at Clarke College
(now Clarke University), a Catholic women's college founded by Sisters
of Charity of the Blessed Virgin Mary in Dubuque, Iowa. That same
year, that National Science Foundation awarded her a grant of $25,000
payable over two years for "instructional equipment for undergraduate
education." One of the first computer science departments at a small
college, Keller directed this department for twenty years. Clarke
College now has the Keller Computer Center and Information Services,
which is named after her and which provides computing and
telecommunication support to Clarke College students, faculty members,
and staff. The college has also established the Mary Kenneth Keller
Computer Science Scholarship in her honor.

Keller was an advocate for the involvement of women in computing and
the use of computers for education. She helped to establish the
Association of Small Computer Users in Education (ASCUE). She went on
to write four books in the field. At the ACM/SIGUCC User Services
Conference in 1975, Keller declared "we have not fully used a computer
as the greatest interdisciplinary tool that has been invented to
date."

Keller died on January 10, 1985, at the age of 71.
